add cl_khr_unified_svm extension (#1282)
KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs: extensions/cl_khr_unified_svm.asciidoc

Behavior is undefined if a previously enqueued command that may be using _ptr_ is still executing.
If _ptr_ is `NULL` then no action occurs.

*clSVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR* will return `CL_SUCCESS` if the function executes successfully.
Otherwise, it returns one of the following errors:

* `CL_INVALID_CONTEXT` if _context_ is not a valid context.
* `CL_INVALID_PROPERTY` if a memory property name in _properties_ is not a supported property name, if the value specified for a supported property name is not valid, or if the same property name is specified more than once.
* `CL_INVALID_VALUE` if _flags_ contains an invalid SVM free flag.
* `CL_INVALID_VALUE` if _ptr_ is not a value returned by *clSVMAlloc*, *clSVMAllocWithPropertiesKHR*, or a `NULL` pointer.
* `CL_OUT_OF_RESOURCES` if there is a failure to allocate resources required by the OpenCL implementation on the device.
* `CL_OUT_OF_HOST_MEMORY` if there is a failure to allocate resources required by the OpenCL implementation on the host.

[NOTE]
====
Whether *clSVMFree* or *clSVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR* is blocking or non-blocking is unspecified.

> Applications should not rely on *clSVMFree* or *clSVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR* for synchronization, nor assume that *clSVMFree* or *clVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR* cannot cause deadlocks.

Reviewer: As discussed in the 2025/03/18 memory subgroup TSG, I think this note should be reworded to make it clear that
- Deadlocks can only happen when **clSVMFree** (or **clSVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR**) is called on an allocation that may be used by commands pending execution.
- "blocking" means "waiting for pending commands that may use the allocation to complete execution"

With these changes, this would be allowed by the "behavior is undefined" statement above but, strictly speaking, the current wording for the note suggests that deadlocks could happen in any scenarios.

[source]
----
// TODO: should this be a bitfield, or is this an enum?
// If it is an enum, it should be renamed.
typedef cl_bitfield         cl_svm_free_flags_khr;

/* cl_svm_free_flags_khr */
#define CL_SVM_FREE_BLOCKING_KHR                        (1 << 0)
----

Enumeration type and values for the _param_name_ parameter to *clGetSVMPointerInfoKHR* to query information about an SVM allocation.

[source]
----
typedef cl_uint cl_svm_pointer_info_khr;

#define CL_SVM_INFO_TYPE_INDEX_KHR                  0x2088
#define CL_SVM_INFO_CAPABILITIES_KHR                0x2089
#define CL_SVM_INFO_PROPERTIES_KHR                  0x208A
#define CL_SVM_INFO_ACCESS_FLAGS_KHR                0x208B
#define CL_SVM_INFO_BASE_PTR_KHR                    0x419B
#define CL_SVM_INFO_SIZE_KHR                        0x419C
#define CL_SVM_INFO_ASSOCIATED_DEVICE_HANDLE_KHR    0x419D
----

Accepted values for the _param_name_ parameter to *clSetKernelExecInfo* to enable and disable indirect access to SVM allocations made by *clSVMAllocWithPropertiesKHR* or *clSVMAlloc*:

[source]
----
/* cl_kernel_exec_info */
#define CL_KERNEL_EXEC_INFO_SVM_INDIRECT_ACCESS_KHR 0x11BB
----

> == Modifications to the OpenCL API Specification

Reviewer 2: What about updates to section 3.3 Memory Model?

* `CL_INVALID_VALUE` if _flags_ contains an invalid SVM free flag.
* `CL_INVALID_VALUE` if _ptr_ is not a value returned by *clSVMAlloc*, *clSVMAllocWithPropertiesKHR*, or a `NULL` pointer.
* `CL_OUT_OF_RESOURCES` if there is a failure to allocate resources required by the OpenCL implementation on the device.
* `CL_OUT_OF_HOST_MEMORY` if there is a failure to allocate resources required by the OpenCL implementation on the host.

By default, *clSVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR* does not wait for previously enqueued commands that may be using _ptr_ to finish before freeing _ptr_.
It is the responsibility of the application to make sure enqueued commands that use _ptr_ are complete before freeing _ptr_.
Behavior is undefined if a previously enqueued command that may be using _ptr_ is still executing.
Applications should take particular care freeing memory allocations with kernels that may access memory indirectly, since a kernel that accesses memory indirectly may be using any memory allocation of the specified type or types.

> To wait for previously enqueued commands to finish that may be using _ptr_ before freeing _ptr_, use the flag `CL_SVM_FREE_BLOCKING_KHR`.

Author: SYCL is clarifying the description of `sycl::free`, see: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SYCL-Docs/pull/758

We should consider how this could / should affect unified SVM free behavior.

A few thoughts:

1. The updated SYCL spec explicitly says (as a non-normative note) that the SYCL free may be "blocking" or "non-blocking".  As long as we are OK with a similar behavior in the unified SVM spec, we can replace the explicit `CL_SVM_FREE_BLOCKING_KHR` flag with a similar non-normative note, which would be a nice simplification.
    * This would not preclude adding additional flags or properties to enforce more specific freeing behaviors in the future, if desired.
2. If we remove the `CL_SVM_FREE_BLOCKING_KHR` flag then will not be adding any new SVM free flags or SVM free properties, so strictly speaking we could also remove `clSVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR` from the spec as well.  I'm still inclined to keep it, though, both to add extensibility for the future, and because `clSVMFree` does not return an error code.
3. We should take a closer look at `clEnqueueSVMFree` to ensure it does what we want it to do, to asynchronously free SVM via a command in a command queue.

Reviewer 3: There's no mention of command flushing here. Does this function get added to the list of functions that implicitly flush? (blocking clEnqueue commands and clReleaseCommandQueue)

Or must the application ensure that the commands are flushed another way?

Author: I don't think `clSVMFree` or `clSVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR` should _require_ any implicit flushing.

* Our trend has been to reduce requirements to implicitly flush, rather than adding them.
* The existing `clSVMFree` does not have any requirement to implicitly flush.

That said, I think it is _allowable_ for an implementation to flush on a call to `clSVMFree` if required or desired.  Does this make sense?

Note, if we align more closely to the proposed SYCL behavior, then we would be even more permissive, because `clSVMFree` would be allowed to flush and wait for commands to complete.

Author: The current extension text aligns very closely with the SYCL text, specifically:

> Whether clSVMFree or clSVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR is blocking or non-blocking is unspecified. Applications should not rely on clSVMFree or clSVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR for synchronization, nor assume that clSVMFree or clSVMFreeWithPropertiesKHR cannot cause deadlocks.

So, I think we can resolve this GitHub comment thread.

Note, there is another open comment thread to discuss refining the text further.

--

. Should we add a device query for a maximum supported SVM fill pattern size, or should the maximum supported fill pattern size implicitly be defined by the size of the largest data type supported by the device?
+
--
`RESOLVED`:
The initial version of this extension will not support larger fill patterns.
--

. Can a pointer to a device, host, or shared SVM allocation be used to create a `cl_mem` using `CL_MEM_USE_HOST_PTR`?
+
--
*UNRESOLVED*:
Trending "no" in all cases.
If the SVM allocation is from the same context this could be an error, such as `CL_INVALID_HOST_PTR`.
If the SVM allocation is from a different context then behavior could be undefined.
--

. Can a pointer to a device, host, or shared SVM allocation be used to create a `cl_mem` buffer using `CL_MEM_COPY_HOST_PTR`?
+
--
*UNRESOLVED*:
Trending "no" for device and shared USM allocations.
If the USM allocation is from the same context this could be an error, such as `CL_INVALID_HOST_PTR`.
If the USM allocation is from a different context then behavior could be undefined.

Trending "yes" for host USM allocations, both when the host USM allocation is from this context and from another context.
--

> . Can a pointer to a device, host, or shared SVM allocation be passed to API functions to read from or write to `cl_mem` objects, such as *clEnqueueReadBuffer* or *clEnqueueWriteImage*?

Author: Discussed briefly in the January 7th memory subgroup.  We may want to consider buffers and images separately.

Trending "no" for shared USM allocations.
If the shared USM allocation is from the same context this could be an error, such as `CL_INVALID_HOST_PTR`.
If the shared USM allocation is from a different context then behavior could be undefined.
--

. Can a pointer to a device, host, or shared USM allocation be passed as the `pattern` argument to API functions to fill a `cl_mem`, SVM allocation, or USM allocation, such as *clEnqueueFillBuffer*?
+
--
*UNRESOLVED*:
Trending "no" for device and shared allocations.
If the USM allocation is from the same context this could be an error, such as `CL_INVALID_HOST_PTR`.
If the USM allocation is from a different context then behavior could be undefined.

Trending "yes" for host USM allocations, both when the host USM allocation is from this context and from another context.
--

. Should we support passing traditional `cl_mem_flags` via the USM allocation properties?
+
--
`RESOLVED`: We decided not to accept any `cl_mem_flags` or `cl_svm_mem_flags`, and added access properties instead.
--

. Exactly how do the additional SVM types affect the memory model?
+
--
*UNRESOLVED*:
--

> . Should it be an error to set an unknown pointer as a kernel argument using *clSetKernelArgSVMPointer* if no devices support shared system allocations?

Author: Discussed in the January 7th memory subgroup.  For SYCL, we generally want to follow C++ semantics, meaning that it is valid to pass any pointer to a function (or kernel) and it is only an problem (specifically, undefined behavior) to dereference a bogus pointer.  This would imply that it should NOT be an error to set a kernel argument that does not point into a memory region returned by clSVMAlloc, even for an implementation that didn't support system SVM.

See: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs/pull/905

Author: Discussed in the July 1st memory subgroup.  Given that we recently updated the Intel USM extension to follow these C++ semantics at the request of our SYCL runtime, I strongly recommend that we adopt this behavior for the unified SVM extension also.  This means it would not be an error to set a bogus kernel argument and only would be an error to dereference a bogus pointer in the kernel.

Author: This is resolved in the spec document and is tested in the CTS.  It is not an error to set an unknown pointer as a kernel argument and it is only an error to dereference the unknown pointer in a kernel.  Therefore, I am resolving this GitHub comment also.

    Allocations that are owned by a device generally trade off access limitations for higher performance.
| `CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_DEVICE_UNASSOCIATED_KHR`
  | This type of SVM does not need to be associated with a device handle.
| `CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_CONTEXT_ACCESS_KHR`
  | This type of SVM is accessible to other devices in the context that support the SVM type.
| `CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_OWNED_KHR`
  | This type of SVM is owned by the host and is not intended to migrate to a device.
    Allocations that are owned by the host generally trade off wide accessibility for potentially higher per-access costs.
| `CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_READ_KHR`
  | This type of SVM is readable on the host without needing to map or unmap the allocation.
| `CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_WRITE_KHR`
  | This type of SVM is writeable on the host without needing to map or unmap the allocation.
| `CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_MAP_KHR`
  | This type of SVM is accessible on the host but requires mapping and unmapping the allocation.
| `CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_DEVICE_READ_KHR`
  | This type of SVM is accessible on the device for reading.
| `CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_DEVICE_WRITE_KHR`

>   | This type of SVM is writeable on the device for writing.

Author: We should clarify exactly what is meant by "accessible on the device for reading" and "accessible on the device for writing", given issues like #770.

* Do these capabilities only apply to kernels, or do they apply to other APIs as well?

Specifically:
* What capabilities are needed for clEnqueueSVMMemcpy?  Does it matter if the SVM allocation is the memcpy source or destination?
* What capabilities are needed for clEnqueueSVMMemFill?
* What capabilities are needed for clEnqueueSVMMigrateMem?

Minor, there is a small typo here too: "writeable on the device for writing" should be "accessible on the device for writing".

Author: Discussed in the November 29th memory subgroup.  We don't want to repeat the mistakes we made leading to #770, so our intent is that these capabilities apply to all forms of device access, not just kernels.  Therefore:

* What capabilities are needed for clEnqueueSVMMemcpy?
    * DEVICE_READ is needed to be a memcpy source, and DEVICE_WRITE is needed for a memcpy dst.
* What capabilities are needed for clEnqueueSVMMemFill?
    * DEVICE_WRITE is needed to be a memfill dst. 
* What capabilities are needed for clEnqueueSVMMigrateMem?
    * TBD - do we want DEVICE_READ to migrate to the host (via CL_MIGRATE_MEM_OBJECT_HOST), and DEVICE_WRITE to migrate to the device?

Author: Coming back to this discussion with fresh eyes:

* For clEnqueueSVMMemcpy and clEnqueueSVMMemFill, what should the behavior be if a source or destination SVM pointer does not have the required capabilities?
    * Should this be undefined behavior?
    * Or, should this be an error?  If so, which error?  Note that we do not currently define error behavior for these cases.
* For clEnqueueSVMMigrateMem, I don't think it makes sense to require any capabilities, for several reasons:
    1. It's unclear whether the device or the host is performing the operation, therefore it's unclear whether the device or host capabilities should apply.
    2. Migrating memory does not affect the functional correctness of an application, only its performance characteristics, therefore if an implementation cannot migrate an allocation it can simply be ignored.

The scenarios we evaluated were:

* For OpenCL 2.0 SVM, *clSVMAlloc* with a size of zero is specified to return a `NULL` pointer.
Because *clSVMAlloc* has no mechanism to return an error code, it is unspecified whether this is considered an error.
* For `cl_intel_unified_shared_memory`, calling *clDeviceMemAllocINTEL*, etc. returns `CL_INVALID_BUFFER_SIZE` if the size to allocate is zero.
* For CUDA, calling *cuMemAlloc*, etc. returns an error if the size to allocate is zero.
* The result of calling `malloc(0)` is implementation-defined: it can either return a `NULL` pointer or a unique non-null pointer that must be freed.
If a `NULL` pointer is returned then `errno` may be set to an implementation-defined value.
If a unique non-null pointer is returned then it cannot be dereferenced.
* Allocating an array of zero elements using `new` must return a non-null pointer, though dereferencing the pointer is undefined.

For reference, the full set of options we considered were:

.. [.line-through]#Allow zero-sized allocations and require returning a non-null pointer that must be freed.#
.. Allow zero-sized allocations and require returning a `NULL` pointer.
No error will be generated.

> Note, it is not currently an error to free a `NULL` pointer.

Author: Discussed in the July 1st memory subgroup; see tentative resolution above.

As a follow-up, while the current OpenCL spec says that it is not an error to free a `NULL` pointer using [clSVMFree](https://registry.khronos.org/OpenCL/specs/3.0-unified/html/OpenCL_API.html#clSVMFree):
> If a NULL pointer is passed in svm_pointer, no action occurs.

Should this apply to the asynchronous [clEnqueueSVMFree](https://registry.khronos.org/OpenCL/specs/3.0-unified/html/OpenCL_API.html#clEnqueueSVMFree) also?  This case is not explicitly described.

Author: Fixed by https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs/pull/1282/commits/97a43e19e3d8aaea306ef253d29d22b37ee1aa3b, resolving.

[source]
----
typedef cl_uint cl_svm_pointer_info_khr;

#define CL_SVM_INFO_TYPE_INDEX_KHR                  0x2088
#define CL_SVM_INFO_CAPABILITIES_KHR                0x2089
#define CL_SVM_INFO_PROPERTIES_KHR                  0x208A
#define CL_SVM_INFO_ACCESS_FLAGS_KHR                0x208B
#define CL_SVM_INFO_BASE_PTR_KHR                    0x419B
#define CL_SVM_INFO_SIZE_KHR                        0x419C
#define CL_SVM_INFO_ASSOCIATED_DEVICE_HANDLE_KHR    0x419D
----

Accepted values for the _param_name_ parameter to {clSetKernelExecInfo} to enable and disable indirect access to SVM allocations made by {clSVMAllocWithPropertiesKHR} or {clSVMAlloc}:

[source]
----
/* cl_kernel_exec_info */
#define CL_KERNEL_EXEC_INFO_SVM_INDIRECT_ACCESS_KHR 0x11BB
----

== Modifications to the OpenCL API Specification

=== Section 4.1 - Querying Platform Info:

Add to Table 3 - List of supported param_names by {clGetPlatformInfo}:

[caption="Table 5. "]
.List of supported param_names by clGetDeviceInfo
[width="100%",cols="<30%,<20%,<50%",options="header"]
|====
| Device Info | Return Type | Description

> | {CL_PLATFORM_SVM_TYPE_CAPABILITIES_KHR}

Reviewer 4: Would a platform be allowed to return an entry with a bitfield set to 0?
If not, is this something we would like to allow?

Author: Gut feeling: in a perfect world, I'd prefer that we did not need to allow this, but in an imperfect world I can see how this might be useful to support "unused" entries.

Would you mind filing a separate issue to discuss in more detail?  Regardless what we decide, we should add something to the unified SVM consistency test, to either disallow this (if we decide to disallow it) or to check for any other requirements (if we decide to allow it).

Author: Discussed in the March 24th memory subgroup.  We can think of reasons why this might be useful, so we're leaning towards allowing entries with a bitfield set to zero.

Tagging @kpet for additional feedback.

      | Queries the combinations of SVM capabilities describing the SVM types supported by an OpenCL device.
        Returns an array of bitfields, where each bitfield in the array describes the SVM capabilities for one SVM type.
        The size of the returned array must match the size of the array returned by the platform query {CL_PLATFORM_SVM_TYPE_CAPABILITIES_KHR}.

        Each entry in the returned array must be either a super-set of the entry in the array returned by the platform query {CL_PLATFORM_SVM_TYPE_CAPABILITIES_KHR}, indicating that the SVM type is supported by the device, or zero, indicating that the SVM type is not supported by this device.

        Please refer to the <<svm-capabilities-table,SVM capabilities>> table for valid capability values and their description.
| {CL_DEVICE_SVM_CONCURRENT_ACCESS_ATOM_SIZE_KHR}
  | {size_t_TYPE}
      | Queries the size and alignment in bytes that bound concurrent access to SVM allocations.
        The returned value must be zero or a power of two.

        If the device does not support concurrent access to SVM allocations, then the query must return `0`, indicating that concurrent access is not supported.

>         If the query for {CL_DEVICE_SVM_CAPABILITIES} includes {CL_DEVICE_SVM_FINE_GRAIN_BUFFER} or {CL_DEVICE_SVM_FINE_GRAIN_SYSTEM}, then the query must return one, indicating that concurrent access occurs at the granularity of individual bytes within allocations.

Reviewer 4: Should this refer to {CL_DEVICE_SVM_FINE_GRAIN_BUFFER} with {CL_MEM_SVM_ATOMICS} ?

Author: I don't think so.  Broadly speaking, if an implementation supports fine-grain buffer SVM without SVM atomics, then it should support (fine-grain) concurrent access.  Refer to:

https://registry.khronos.org/OpenCL/specs/3.0-unified/html/OpenCL_API.html#shared-virtual-memory

>**Fine-Grained buffer SVM**: Sharing occurs at the granularity of individual loads/stores into bytes within OpenCL buffer memory objects.

Then, CL_MEM_SVM_ATOMICS adds concurrent **atomic** access on top of this.  Kind of make sense?

Author: Resolving after discussion in the March 24th teleconference.

| {CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_DEVICE_OWNED_KHR}
  | This type of SVM is owned by an associated device handle and is not intended to migrate to another device or the host.
    Allocations that are owned by a device generally trade off access limitations for higher performance.
| {CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_DEVICE_UNASSOCIATED_KHR}
  | This type of SVM does not need to be associated with a device handle.
| {CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_CONTEXT_ACCESS_KHR}
  | This type of SVM is accessible to other devices in the context that support the SVM type.
| {CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_OWNED_KHR}
  | This type of SVM is owned by the host and is not intended to migrate to a device.
    Allocations that are owned by the host generally trade off wide accessibility for potentially higher per-access costs.
| {CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_READ_KHR}
  | This type of SVM is readable on the host without needing to map or unmap the allocation.
| {CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_WRITE_KHR}
  | This type of SVM is writeable on the host without needing to map or unmap the allocation.
| {CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_MAP_KHR}

>   | This type of SVM is accessible on the host but requires mapping and unmapping the allocation.

Author: From a discussion in the March 3rd memory subgroup: The description of this capability is too strong ("requires").  As written, it cannot be combined with, say, the HOST_READ and HOST_WRITE capabilities.

Since this capability is intending to say that this type of SVM supports mapping and unmapping, how about:

```suggestion
| {CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_MAP_KHR}
  | This type of SVM supports mapping and unmapping for access on the host.
```

Reviewer 4: How about:
```suggestion
| {CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_MAP_KHR}
  | This type of SVM can be accessed on the host by mapping and unmapping the allocation.
```
I think it makes clearer that you need to map to access on the host if `CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_READ_KHR` or `CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_HOST_WRITE_KHR` are not present without being as restrictive as "requires". Otherwise, I'm fine with your suggestion.

    implementation on the host

[[svm-queries-table]]
.List of supported param_names by clGetSVMPointerInfoKHR
[width="100%",cols="<34%,<33%,<33%",options="header"]
|====
| *cl_svm_pointer_info_khr* | Return type | Info. returned in _param_value_
| {CL_SVM_INFO_TYPE_INDEX_KHR}
  | {cl_uint_TYPE}
      | Returns the SVM type index used to allocate the SVM allocation.

        Returns {CL_UINT_MAX} if _ptr_ does not point into an SVM allocation returned from {clSVMAllocWithPropertiesKHR} or {clSVMAlloc} for _context_.

| {CL_SVM_INFO_CAPABILITIES_KHR}
  | {cl_svm_capabilities_khr_TYPE}
      | Returns the SVM capabilities for the SVM allocation for the specified _device_.
        If _device_ is `NULL` and there is a device associated with the SVM allocation, returns the SVM capabilities for the device associated with the SVM allocation.
        If _device_ is `NULL` and there is no device associated with the SVM allocation, returns the SVM capabilities for all devices in _context_ supporting the SVM allocation.

        Returns `0` if _ptr_ does not point into an SVM allocation returned from {clSVMAllocWithPropertiesKHR} or {clSVMAlloc} for _context_.

| {CL_SVM_INFO_PROPERTIES_KHR}

>   | {cl_svm_alloc_properties_khr_TYPE}

Author: ```suggestion
  | {cl_svm_alloc_properties_khr_TYPE}[]
```

The list is terminated with the special property `0`.
If no allocation properties are required, _properties_ may be `NULL`.
Please refer to the <<svm-alloc-properties-table,SVM allocation properties>> table for valid SVM allocation properties and their description.

_size_ is the size in bytes for the suggestion.
If  _size_ is `0`, it is ignored.

_suggested_svm_type_index_ is a pointer that will contain the result of the query.
The suggested SVM type may be {CL_UINT_MAX}, indicating that there is no SVM allocation type for the _context_ and devices in _device_list_ that support the _required_capabilities_ and _properties_.

{clGetSVMSuggestedTypeIndexKHR} returns {CL_SUCCESS} if the query executed successfully.  Otherwise, it returns one of the following errors:

  * {CL_INVALID_CONTEXT}
    ** if _context_ is not a valid OpenCL context
  * {CL_INVALID_PROPERTY}
    ** if a memory property name in _properties_ is not a supported property name
    ** if the value specified for a supported property name is not valid
    ** if the same property name is specified more than once
  * {CL_INVALID_VALUE}
    ** if _required_capabilities_ contains an invalid SVM capability

>     ** if _desired_capabilities_ contains an invalid SVM capability

Reviewer 4: What would be consider an invalid SVM capability here?
As the last capability right now is `#define CL_SVM_CAPABILITY_INDIRECT_ACCESS_KHR           (1 << 14)`
Any value greater than that?
If yes, we might need to modify the current test.

Author: Ah, I'm guessing you're referring to [this test](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-CTS/blob/b1100a52d0667a011b2fa13d5822046d4b6c212b/test_conformance/SVM/test_unified_svm_api_suggested_type_index.cpp#L73) specifically?

You're right that this test is inconsistent with this error description since it's specifically passing some bogus capabilities to test the `CL_UINT_MAX` suggested type index.

What do we want to do here?  Some possibilities:

1. Keep the test behavior and update the spec.  If an application requests an unknown or unsupported required capability, return `CL_UINT_MAX` to indicate that no SVM type index supports this capability.
2. Keep the spec behavior and update the test.  Note that this could make it difficult or impossible to test the `CL_UINT_MAX` behavior depending on the capabilities supported by the implementation.
3. Maybe we could have different behavior for "required" vs. "desired" capabilities, although this sounds confusing, and the more I think about it I'm not sure that it buys us anything.

I think the extension is slightly easier to use if we keep the test behavior and update the spec, since otherwise it's an application requirement to check that the required capabilities are supported by the device to avoid an error.  I don't have a very strong opinion, though.

Reviewer 4: > Ah, I'm guessing you're referring to this test specifically?

Yes, I was referring to that test.

> What do we want to do here?

In my opinion, I lean towards 1, removing the error conditions for required and desired capabilities and just return `CL_UINT_MAX` as the suggested type index and `CL_SUCCESS`.

> I think the extension is slightly easier to use if we keep the test behavior and update the spec, since otherwise it's an application requirement to check that the required capabilities are supported by the device to avoid an error.

I agree.

Author: Fixed by https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs/pull/1282/commits/0d2663ef72f7fbdc6c8e70c38c6ee5a13bd2c594.

    ** if _suggested_svm_type_index_ is `NULL`
  * {CL_INVALID_BUFFER_SIZE}
// TODO: update depending on the updated queries for available SVM sizes:
    ** if _size_ is greater than {CL_DEVICE_MAX_MEM_ALLOC_SIZE} for any OpenCL device in _context_ that supports the specified SVM type

>     ** if _size_ is greater than {CL_DEVICE_MAX_MEM_ALLOC_SIZE} for a device associated with the SVM allocation

Reviewer 4: Should the `CL_INVALID_BUFFER_SIZE` error be removed?
 As per the resolved issue 28:

> This extension will not define an upper limit on the size of an SVM allocation

Author: Yes, I'll go through and tidy up this error condition (and a few others).

Author: Fixed by https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs/pull/1282/commits/97a43e19e3d8aaea306ef253d29d22b37ee1aa3b.

Note that the this error condition was already removed for `clSVMAllocWithPropertiesKHR`, with a nice note describing the behavior when the allocation size exceeds `CL_DEVICE_MAX_MEM_ALLOC_SIZE`, but I missed this case for `clGetSVMSuggestedTypeIndexKHR` :sob:

Specifically, this extension provides:

* Extensible interfaces to support many types of SVM, including the SVM types defined in core OpenCL, in this extension, and additional SVM types defined by other combinations of SVM capabilities.

* Explicit control over memory placement and migration by supporting device-owned SVM allocations for best performance, host-owned SVM allocations for wide visibility, and shared SVM allocations that may migrate between devices and the host.

* The ability to query detailed SVM capabilities for each SVM allocation type supported by a platform and device.

* Additional properties to control how memory is allocated and freed, including properties to associate an SVM allocation with both a device and a context.

* A mechanism to indicate that a kernel may access SVM allocations indirectly, without passing a set of indirectly accessed SVM allocations to the kernel, improving usability and reducing driver overhead for kernels that access many SVM allocations.

* A new query function to query properties of an SVM allocation.

* A new function to suggest an SVM allocation type for a set of SVM capabilities.

== New API Functions

[source]

> ----

Reviewer 4: `clEnqueueSVMMemcpyWithPropertiesKHR` is missing in this block.
